


   		               N U C P L O T
		            -------------------

		Written by Nicholas Luscombe & Roman Laskowski


NUCPLOT is a program that automatically generates schematic 2D
representations of protein-nucleic acid interactions. The input is a
standard PDB file and the output is a colour or black-and-white PostScript
file which gives a simple, at-a-glance representation of the hydrogen bonds
and hydrophobic contacts between protein and nucleic acid.

We recommend the use of HBPLUS (written by Ian McDonald) for calculating
the hydrogen bonds and hydrophobic contacts to be plotted by NUCPLOT.


INSTALLATION OF PROGRAMS
------------------------

1. Decompress and untar the HBPLUS and NUCPLOT programs.
   
   Type the following commands:
	
	gunzip hbplus.tar.gz
	tar -xvf hbplus.tar
	
	gunzip nucplot.tar.gz
	tar -xvf nucplot.tar

   The above commands decompress the files containing the necessary
   programs and creates directories called "hbplus" and "nucplot".

2. Compiling the programs.

   a) HBPLUS:
      Change directories to hbplus and type the following command:
      
         make


   b) NUCPLOT:
      Change directories to nucplot and type the following command:

         cc -o nucplot nucplot.c -lm
         cc -o hbadd hbadd.c -lm

      -lm is an option that includes the Standard Maths library.

3. Het Group Dictionary

   The hbadd program defines ligand molecules from information in the
   PDB's Het Group Dictionary in order to help HBPLUS determine which
   atoms in a ligand are potential hydrogen bond donor and acceptors.
   For hbadd to run, you need to download a copy of the Het Group
   Dictionary from

       ftp://ftp.wwpdb.org/pub/pdb/data/monomers/components.cif
OR
	https://files.wwpdb.org/pub/pdb/data/monomers/components.cif

   Call this file components.cif and place it in your NUCPLOT
   executable directory (defined in step 4 below).

4. Assignment of aliases/logical names

   Under UNIX, the following aliases need to be defined to run NUCPLOT and
   HBPLUS. They can be placed in the user's ".cshrc" file.

       # NUCPLOT
       # -------
       set nucdir = 'nucplot-directory'         <---- See ** below
       setenv nucdir 'nucplot-directory'
       alias nucplot $nucdir'/nucplot.scr'

       # HBPLUS
       # ------
       set hbdir = 'hbplus-program-directory'   <---- See ** below
       setenv hbdir 'hbplus-program-directory'
       alias hbplus $hbdir'/hbplus'

       # ** nucplot-directory gives the full path to where the NUCPLOT
       #    program files (and optionally the Het Group Dictionary) are
       #    held.
       #    Similarly, hbplus-program-directory is the full path to
       #    where the copiled HBPLUS program resides.

   After modifying the .cshrc file, type the following command to set up
   the aliases:

       source .cshrc


RUNNING NUCPLOT
---------------

1. Running NUCPLOT.
   
   Simply type:

      nucplot [pdb filename]

      eg. nucplot /data/pdb/pdb1zaa.ent


2. Outputs from NUCPLOT.

   a) nucplot.ps   - A PostScript file showing the schematic diagram. This
                     may be viewed with GHOSTSCRIPT or GHOSTVIEW.

   b) pdbXXXX.bond - A text file containing a list of interactions shown on
                     the plot, where XXXX is the PDB code.


3. Altering the appearance of the plot.

   The resulting plots can be altered by changing the plot parameters in
   the parameter file "nucplot.par". It can be edited with any text
   editor. If for any reason you wish to restore the parameter file to its
   orignal state, simply delete the existing file and run nucplot. A fresh
   copy of the file with the default settings will be produced.

   a) Print options:
      
      Produce a colour PostScript file (Y/N)? - Defines whether the diagram
      is drawn in colour or black and white.

      Orientation of plot: (P)ortrait or (L)andscape? - Defines whether
      the orientation of the plot is to be portrait or landscape.

      Plot title (Y/N)? - Defines whether the PDB filename is shown on the
      plot as a title.

      Show key to plot (Y/N)? - Defines whether the key to the symbols on
      the plot are shown.

      Output filename = "nucplot.ps" (Y/N)? - Defines whether the output
      filename is nucplot.ps. The alternative format is pdbname_X.ps where
      pdbname is the name of the input file and X is the chain ID of the
      first DNA chain on the plot.


   b) Plot parameters:
      
      Read bonding information from .bond file (Y/N)? - Defines whether the
      protein-DNA, water-DNA, and protein-water-DNA interaction information
      is read from a file in .bond format. A file listing all the
      interactions shown on the plot is automatically produced by
      NUCPLOT. This can be edited and used as an input if the you wish
      to display certain interactions only.

      Include protein residue H-bonds (Y/N)? - Defines whether protein-DNA
      hydrogen bonds should be included in the plot.

      Include non-bridging water H-bonds (Y/N)? - Defines whether
      non-bridging water-DNA hydrogen bonds should be included in the plot.

      Include non-bonded contacts (Y/N)? - Defines whether van der Waals
      interactions should be included in the plot.

      Use one-letter amino acid codes for protein residue names (Y/N)? -
      Defines whether the residue names shown on the plot are represented
      by the single or three letter code.

      Residues only, rather than all atoms, for non-bonded contacts (Y/N)?
      - Defines whether the atom name is shown for the van der Waals
      bonds. Showing only residue names reduces crowding on the plot.


   c) Numerical parameters:
   
      Number of base pairs on each page - Defines the number of base pairs
      to be placed on each page. 

      Distance cut off for hydrogen bonds - Defines the cut off distance
      for hydrogen bonds. Bonds must be below this length to be displayed
      on the plot.

      Distance cut off for non-bonded contacts - Defines the cut off
      distance for van der Waals bonds. 
   

   d) Colour parameters: 

      The colours of the background and various symbols of the plot can be
      defined. The definitions of the different colours are described
      below. The colour name must be one that is defined in the list of
      colour definitions.


   e) Colour definitions:
   
      The colour definitions table allows you to modify any of the default
      colour definitions. You ca also set up new colours of your own (up to
      20 different colours are allowed). 

      Each entry contains three numbers, each between 0.0 and 1.0, giving
      the ratios of red, green and blue, respectively, making up the given
      colour.

      Each colour has a name defined within the single quotes. These names
      are referred to when assigning colours in the "Colour parameters"
      section (see above section). 


Roman Laskowski
European Bioinformatics Institute,
Wellcome Trust Genome Campus,
Hinxton,
Cambridge, CB10 1SD,
United Kingdom

Tel:- +44 (0)1223 492 542
Fax:- +44 (0)1223 494 468

Email: roman@ebi.ac.uk 
